so this is another talk in my series
about the introduction to astronomy and
this is beyond Pluto era cough Ultima
Thule and object mu 69 this is really
the story of what happened with the new
Horizons spacecraft after it had flown
past Pluto and they realized that it
still had some fuel left so discovered
by the Hubble Space Telescope on the
26th of June 2014 giving it to the name
2014 mu 69 you can turn the MU 69 into
the 26th of June if you know how to do
the unfolding trick with those numbers
was a little tiny object highlighted
there moving across the star field got a
little green ring drawn on it to make it
more visible for you that motion and
overlay it here is the little tiny dot
moving against the background stars
there's a little tiny object way out in
the outer solar system it's only about
30 kilometers across very tiny for
comparison here is asteroid Itokawa
it's roughly the same sort of shape as
we think a lot of these bodies are these
potato shaped rubble piles that look
like they've been stuck together so that
was a photograph that a Japanese
spacecraft took some years ago and we
think that mu 69 probably going to be
rather small and therefore not have a
nice round spherical shape because these
little tiny objects just don't have the
gravity to force themselves into a round
shape so the new
in spacecraft there flew past Pluto and
image both Pluto and the moon of Pluto
called Charon in great detail that's
covered in one of my other talks and the
question really was with this perfectly
working spacecraft with some fuel left
on it where should it go next
it couldn't stop and go into orbit it
was the fastest spacecraft ever having
picked up gravity assists from various
planets including Jupiter on the way to
get out to Pluto in only 10 years that's
traveling at some 40,000 miles an hour
relative to the earth and he just didn't
have the fuel to slow down but did have
enough fuel to maneuver a little bit and
so the idea was that potentially there
might be something out there and that
led to the search for potential targets
and three were discovered PT one that we
talked about a little bit at the start
of this talk PT 2 and PT 3 all on fairly
similar orbits because they'd have to be
the spacecraft couldn't really change
its trajectory very much it had flown
all the way from the inner solar system
to Pluto so there was pretty much on
course out and you can see at the top of
the screen there the orbits of pt1 pt2
and PT 3 of course PT means potential
target and PT 1 was selected 2014 mu 69
discovered by the Hubble Space Telescope
the idea was as shown in the little
animation the spacecraft came from the
inner solar system and flew past Pluto
on the blue trajectory there and we'll
show that again comes past Jupiter RIT
aiming for Pluto in 2015 it passes Pluto
there the blue and in just four more
years it was going to arrive at MU 69
pt.1
now rather than say PT 1 or MU 69 and
decided to try and give this little
object a name and after a public voting
campaign 34,000 names were suggested by
a hundred and fifteen thousand people
and the one that received the most
nominations just had 40 and that name
was Ultima Thule I named after a
mythical land in the deep north fool was
supposedly an island of the North Seas
and Ultima Thule meant beyond Thule a
mysterious place our formal naming of
the object after the flyby has given it
the name aro cough so you can use any of
those names work for it really now in
order to get the navigation sorted out
for New Horizons we need you to know the
knot the orbit of Eric off very nice and
accurately and they realized that it was
going to pass in front of a number of
stars and blot out the light from the
stars in what's called a stellar
occultation and that's like a miniature
Eclipse but it would only be visible
with a very narrow line of positions
across the earth there's three of these
occupations going to occur against
background stars and you can see the
tracks drawn on the globes of the earth
there so one of them first one goes
through South America across the South
Atlantic and through South Africa the
next one goes right across the Pacific
and the third one again crosses South
America and they were going to be in
June and July of 2017
so NASA sent a team of scientists down
to both Argentina and South Africa ready
for the third of June occultation and
you guessed it they saw absolutely
nothing the surprise was but perhaps the
object was much smaller than expected
perhaps it was only a swarm of debris
and not sure
upon their instruments but it turned out
they were simply in the wrong place so
they missed the event two chances left
the second one was over the Pacific
so they used Sophia the flying infrared
Observatory with a telescope mounted in
a 747 here out over the Pacific and they
tried to observe the event but they
thought they'd missed it completely
again which is very disappointing
however when they got back to the lab
it's very brief drop in the light from
the target star so they've had managed
to pin it down now that and the timing
of that was very helpful in refining the
orbit and giving them the best possible
chance for a third go for the third
possible event later again this time
down in Argentina they took 24 16-inch
telescopes like the one in the picture
there and placed them in a fenceline
right across the track of the projected
line of the Eclipse right and going
either side of it so covering four and a
half kilometers so one of the
telescope's at least was bound to catch
it this time they were not taking any
chances and that worked and it worked
extremely well here are the tracks from
five of the telescopes and to either
side to either side missed it the five
in the middle all saw a different dip in
the light and the dip in the light shows
when the odd star was obscured by the
object when it was revealed and the
length of that dip tells us something
about the size of the object in the
particular position that the telescope
was it's the actual film of the dip from
one of the telescopes the repeats so you
can see it there we go again and the
star disappears and reappears right in
the center of the movie there there it
goes if we look at this track
you could see is that you could fit two
circles a 20 kilometer and 18 kilometers
circle that would roughly line up with
where the dips in those tracks had
occurred and been detected and that's
rather suggestive to lobe shape this is
an image of the Rosetta comet comet 67p
overlaid on top of those showing that
it's possible that an object with that
shape would create that sort of timing
of disappearances
now that refined the orbit nicely able
to an image it from the new horizons
telescope and that allowed them of
course to finalize the trajectory her
flyby so on the first entry of 2019 at
5:30 UTC in the morning they flyby would
take place just three and a half
thousand kilometers above the surface
and that would give the camera a
high-resolution camera a resolution of
30 meters per pixel on the surface which
is very good now this event was
happening
43 point 4 au from the Sun and au is the
earth-sun distance so 43 times as far
away and light and radio waves traveling
at the speed of light takes 6 hours to
reach us here on earth from that
distance so we would have to wait from
5:30 in the morning when the event took
place another six hours to 11:30 before
the data would be arriving and we to be
able to tell whether it was successful
and then after that the bulk data would
be take about a year to download because
of the very very slow speed of
communication at that distance it is the
first picture from the flyby it worked
and indeed we see that two lobed
shape exactly as predicted by the
stellar occultation traces so
is ultima fool or Eric off taken at a
distance of 85,000 miles little movie
here of it as the spacecraft was
approaching it took a number of shots
and you could see how the two lobes are
still effectively spinning around their
center of mass here and a number of
shots taken in the steel frames at the
bottom there showing that so we think
this is indicating how the object was
formed in that round about the dawn of
the solar system there would have been a
lot of small lumps small bits of space
rock whizzing around and perhaps some of
them clustered together under gravity
and then started Co orbiting and we
probably ended up with two main lumps
the rest being kicked out and thrown
away in the interactions which gradually
spiraled in together until they softly
bumped together and merged to form the
shape of the two lobes object we see
today so here again is a sort of attempt
to show you the object in 3d and
actually when you look at this you can
realize that the shape of it is not two
spheres stuck together you can see that
there's considerable flattening in that
3d image so here's a really
high-resolution black-and-white picture
of the two lobes stuck together and you
can imagine that larger lobe is is
almost pancake shaped this is the sort
of model the original idea was perhaps
it was just be two round balls but no we
think it's much more flattened objects
with the larger one being especially
flattened and spinning around around
that central that spin axis that you can
see marked there and that probably makes
a lot of sense because committee would
have pulled together all of this
material and the swirling clouds and
objects tend to coalesce into flat disks
they tend to end up with one dominant
direction of spin and everything else
being flattened out
so you can imagine that that the two
objects would have been spinning in
towards each other the odd little
collision going on and then the tidal
effects the drag from collisions and
from gas and dust would gradually reduce
the angular spin angular momentum until
they would bump into each other and form
the object that we see today they've
also looked at Eric off with the
spectrometer and being able to see that
color image on the far side there shows
us the different regions of different
minerals that there are within the one
larger component object and what this is
telling us is that indeed each of those
large objects themselves coalesced out
of a series of smaller lumps that's
stuck together one after another
building these larger and larger objects
so you can see the early building blocks
that have gone together and then that
merged and formed the complex structure
that we see now and I think we just got
one more slide here which is the
disappearing into the distance as New
Horizons whizzed past looking back
towards Eric off but just the outline of
it lit up and we're looking at the unlit
side away from the Sun so New Horizons
is continuing on its way there's a very
very small amount of fewer left now and
no decision has been made as to whether
to try and attempt yet another
rendezvous but it would seem to be a
shame not to try thank you very
much that's the story of New Horizons
and beyond Pluto